# Introducci칩n

El tema central de este libro es GraphQL en aplicaciones modernas. Mientras que GraphQL es solamente una especificacion que puede ser usada en muchos lenguajes de programacion, este libro hace foco en GraphQL en Javascript. Facebook, la compa침ia detras de GraphQL, lanz칩 la referencia de implementacion en Javascript, y es por uan buena razon: Actualmente Javascript es el lenguaje que m치s desarrolladores ha convencido en este ultimo tiempo y tambien por su gran ecosistema junto a su arquitectura cliente-servidor. 

GraphQL es un lenguaje de consulta (query language) que puede ser usado por cualquier persona, y a menudo cierra la brecha entre aplicaciones cliente y aplicaciones en el servidor. No especifica absolutamente nada sobre la capa de red que es usada, por lo tanto, los datos pueden ser leidos y escritos entre aplicaciones en el cliente y el servidor. Es usado para complementar la infrastructura de red por muchas librerias y herramientas en Javascript. El cliente toma las ventajas de soluciones populares como React, Angular y Vue, mientras que desde el lado del servidor se pueden usar librerias intermediarias (como Express, Koa, Hapi) en el entorno de Node.js. Es una cuestion de enviar operaciones de GraphQL a traves de HTTP por medio del cable para poder conectar ambos lados.

The emergence of GraphQL introduces a new era in web development. RESTful applications were the industry favorite for data transfers between client and server applications, but modern requirements have shifted. Applications have to deal with multiple clients--i.e. desktop, web, mobile, wearables--which are all interested in APIs exposed by server applications. The choice becomes one between using multiple client-specific APIs with REST, or just one API with GraphQL for all client applications, which hardly seems like a choice at all. GraphQL is more than just a unified interface, though; its ecosystem offers powerful capabilities and even more potential as its open source community grows.

For me, it was a lucky coincidence that a former coworker open-sourced the GraphQL implementation for Java. He worked to become one of GraphQL's first open source contributors, eventually creating the go-to implementations for Java. The experience shaped my own thinking about GraphQL, which was expanded when my employer evaluated GraphQL for their enterprise application. The glue between our client and server application was initially largely influenced by REST; we had API endpoints for all our RESTful resources in place, eventually running into issues like Facebook for API-consuming client-side applications. The API endpoints were too rigid, so they required aggregations and modifications. An aggregation means putting resources into a singular API endpoint, where a modification is to offer variations of an API endpoint to request different representations of a resource. We introduced our own implementation to request resources from the server and ended up with our own naive implementation of GraphQL. From a client-side perspective, only Relay for React was released those days as a sophisticated library in terms of consuming GraphQL APIs, so we invested time in this as well. In the end, GraphQL was too early in its development, so we postponed introducing it to our technology stack. Admittedly, none of us knew it would become so powerful or popular.

This book starts with GraphQL in client-side applications, so you will use React as a UI library to consume a third-party GraphQL API, which happens to be GitHub's GraphQL API. It is a popular choice among developers for a couple reasons: GitHub was one of few popular companies to release a GraphQL API to the public; GitHub's subsequent growth has granted some credibility to GraphQL itself; and a third-party API usually focuses on client-side GraphQL application in the beginning. This book teaches how to consume the GraphQL API in a client application without having to build the GraphQL server yourself.

When we shift gears in this book toward GraphQL on the server side, we will implement a GraphQL API that can eventually be consumed by a GraphQL client application. You will implement powerful features such as authentication, database connections and pagination. By the end, you should have a firm grasp about using GraphQL in your JavaScript applications.
